The President:
On Friday, we received better
news than we expected about the
state of our economy.
We learned that we lost 247,000
jobs in July --
some 200,000 fewer jobs than we lost in June,
and far fewer than the nearly
700,000 a month we were losing
at the beginning of the year.
Of course, this is little
comfort to anyone who saw their
job disappear in July, and to
the millions of Americans who
are looking for work.
And I will not rest until anyone
who's looking for work can find a job.
Still, this month's jobs numbers
are a sign that we've begun to
put the brakes on this recession
and that the worst may be behind us.
But we must do more than rescue
our economy from this immediate
crisis; we must rebuild it
stronger than before.
We must lay a new foundation for
future growth and prosperity,
and a key pillar of a new
foundation is health insurance
reform -- reform that we are now closer to achieving than ever before.
There are still details to be
hammered out.
There are still differences to
be reconciled.
But we are moving toward a broad
consensus on reform.
Four committees in Congress have
produced legislation --
an unprecedented level of
agreement on a difficult and
complex challenge.
In addition to the ongoing work
in Congress,
providers have agreed to bring
down costs.
Drug companies have agreed to
make prescription drugs more
affordable for seniors.
The AARP supports reform because
of the better care it will offer
to seniors.
And the American Nurses
Association and the American
Medical Association, which
represent the millions of nurses
and doctors who know our health
care system best,
all support reform, as well.
As we draw close to finalizing
-- and passing --
real health insurance reform,
the defenders of the status quo
and political point-scorers in
Washington are growing fiercer
in their opposition.
In recent days and weeks, some
have been using misleading
information to defeat what they
know is the best chance of
reform we have ever had.
And that's why it's important,
especially now,
as Senators and Representatives
head home and meet with their
constituents, for you, the
American people,
to have all the facts.
So, let me explain what reform
will mean for you.
And let me start by dispelling
the outlandish rumors that
reform will promote euthanasia,
or cut Medicaid,
or bring about a government
takeover of health care.
That's simply not true.
This isn't about putting
government in charge of your
health insurance; it's about
putting you in charge of your
health insurance.
Under the reforms we seek, if
you like your doctor,
you can keep your doctor.
If you like your health care
plan,
you can keep your health care
plan.
And while reform is obviously
essential for the 46 million
Americans who don't have health
insurance,
it will also provide more
stability and security to the
hundreds of millions who do.
Right now, we have a system that
works well for the insurance
industry, but that doesn't
always work well for you.
What we need, and what we will
have when we pass health
insurance reform, are consumer
protections to make sure that
those who have insurance are
treated fairly and that
insurance companies are held
accountable.
We'll require insurance
companies to cover routine
checkups and preventive care,
like mammograms and
colonoscopies, or eye and foot exams for diabetics,
so we can avoid chronic
illnesses that cost too many
lives and too much money.
We'll stop insurance companies
from denying coverage because of
a person's medical history.
I'll never forget watching my own mother,
as she fought cancer in her
final days,
worrying about whether her
insurer would claim her illness
was a preexisting condition.
I've met so many Americans who
worry about the same thing.
And that's why, under these reforms,
insurance companies will no longer be able to deny coverage
because of a previous illness or injury.
And insurance companies will no
longer be allowed to drop or
water down coverage for someone
who has become seriously ill.
Your health insurance ought to
be there for you when it counts
-- and reform will make sure it is.
With reform, insurance companies
will also have to limit how much
you can be charged for
out-of-pocket expenses.
And we will stop insurance
companies from placing arbitrary
caps on the amount of coverage
you can receive in a given year
or a lifetime because no one in
America should go broke because
of an illness.
In the end, the debate about
health insurance reform boils
down to a choice between two
approaches.
The first is almost guaranteed
to double health care costs over
the next decade, leave millions more Americans without
insurance, leave those with insurance vulnerable to
arbitrary denials of coverage, and bankrupt state and federal governments.
That's the status quo.
That's the health care system we
have right now.
So, we can either continue this
approach,
or we can choose another one -- one that will protect people
against unfair insurance practices; provide quality,
affordable insurance to every American;
and bring down rising costs that are swamping families,
businesses, and our budgets.
That's the health care system we
can bring about with reform.
There are those who are focused
on the so-called politics of
health care; who are trying to
exploit differences or concerns
for political gain.
And that's to be expected.
That's Washington.
But let's never forget that this
isn't about politics.
This is about people's lives.
This is about people's
businesses.
This is about America's future.
That's what's at stake.
And that's why health insurance
reform is so important.
That's why we have to get this
done --
and why we will get this done -- by the end of this year.
Thanks so much.